
7/93 of 1 March 1993.
6 Declaration of rectification no.
9/2001 of 13 March 2001 republished Law no.
3/2001 of 23 February
2001 in its entirety.
7 Article 2 of Law no.
44/2006 of 25 August 2006 states that: the present Law shall enter into force on
The first day of the next legislature (i.e. the first day of the 11th legislature).
8 Article 2 of Law no.
45/2006 of 25 August 2006 states that: the present Law shall enter into force on the
First day of the next legislature (i.e. the first day of the 11th legislature).
9 Article 5 of Law no.
43/2007 of 24 August 2007 states that: without prejudice to the provisions of
Article 2 of Law no.
44/2006 and of Article 2 of Law no.
45/2006, both of 25 August 2006, the present Law
Shall enter into force on the first day of the 3rd Legislative Session of the 10th legislature (15 September
2007).
10 Article 4 of Law no.
44/2019 of 21 June 2019 states that: the present law shall enter into force on the
Day following its publication, taking effect at the beginning of the 14th legislature in parallel with its regulatory resolution.
2 Article 1 nature and scope of mandate 1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic represent the whole country, and not the constituencies for which they are elected.
2 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic all possess the same status and all enjoy and are subject to the same rights and duties, without prejudice to specific conditions applicable to the
Exercise and fulfilment thereof and the regime governing the different parliamentary functions
They perform, as laid down by law.
Article 2 beginning and end of term of office
1 – The term of office of Members of the Assembly of the Republic begins upon the first sitting of the Assembly following elections thereto and ends upon the first sitting following the subsequent elections thereto, without prejudice to the suspension or termination of any
Individual term of office.
2 – The filling of vacancies which arise in the Assembly of the Republic shall be regulated by electoral law.
Article 3 verification of credentials
The Assembly of the Republic shall verify Members' credentials, in accordance with the respective Rules of Procedure.
Article 4
Suspension of term of office
1 – The following shall cause a term of office to be suspended:
A) Approval of a request for temporary substitution when there are important grounds
For it, in accordance with Article 5;
B) Criminal proceedings, as laid down in Article 11 (3);
C) occurrence of the situations referred to in Article 20 (1) (a), except for the President of
The Republic, and in Article 20 (1) (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and (l).
2 – In the cases provided for in Article 20 (1) (g), the suspension of the term of office set out in
The previous paragraph is only admissible immediately after the verification of credentials by the Assembly of the Republic, or at the moment at which the Member is installed in the
Respective local authority position, and may not occur for more than a single period of up to
180 days.
Article 5 temporary substitution on important grounds
1 – When there are important grounds for doing so, Members of the Assembly of the Republic may ask the President of the Assembly to substitute them once or more than once during the course of the legislature.
2 – Important grounds shall mean: a) Serious illness that involves being unable to exercise the functions of Member of the
Assembly of the Republic for a period of not less than thirty and not more than one
Hundred and eighty days; b) The taking of maternity or paternity leave;
3 C) The need to ensure the furtherance of proceedings, in accordance with Article 11 (3).
3 – The request for substitution shall be submitted either directly by the Member of the assembly of the Republic himself, or via the leadership of his parliamentary group, in which case it shall be accompanied by a declaration of consent by the Member who is to be substituted.
4 – When based on the grounds set out in paragraph (2) (a) or (b), the temporary substitution of a Member of the Assembly of the Republic shall not cause the processing of his remuneration to cease or any loss of length of service.
Article 6
End of suspension
1 – The suspension of a term of office shall cease:
A) In the case of Article 4 (1) (a), upon the end of the period of substitution, or upon the
Member of the Assembly of the Republic's early return as directly notified to the
President of the Assembly by the Member or the leadership of the parliamentary group to which he belongs;
B) In the case of Article 4 (1) (b), upon the issue of a judicial decision absolving the
Member of the Assembly of the Republic or equivalent, or upon completion of the
Sentence; C) In the case of Article 4 (1) (c), upon the cessation of the function that is incompatible with that of Member of the Assembly of the Republic.
2 – All the powers possessed by the last Member of the Assembly of the Republic from the respective electoral list to have exercised the mandate on the date on which the original
Member resumes the exercise of his mandate shall automatically cease on that date.
3 – Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 11 (3) (b), no Member of the Assembly of the
Republic may return before the end of the fifty days provided for in Article 5 (5).
Article 7 resignation of seat
1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic may resign their seat by means of a written
Declaration, which shall be submitted to the President of the Assembly either in person, or bearing a notarised signature.
2 – No resignation request shall be processed until the leader of the respective parliamentary
Group, when one exists, has first been notified of it.
3 – Without prejudice to their subsequent publication in the Journal of the Assembly of the
Republic, resignations shall take effect when the Bureau announces them to the Plenary.
Article 8
Loss of seat 1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic shall lose their seat when:
A) They become subject to any of the disqualifications or incompatibilities provided for
By law, even when due to facts that arose prior to their election; and the Assembly of
The Republic may not reassess facts which have been the object of a judicial ruling that has already transited in rem judicatam or of an earlier decision by the Assembly itself;
4 b) They do not take up their seat in the Assembly of the Republic, or they exceed the permitted number of failures to attend, except for reasons that are justified under the terms of paragraph (2) and in accordance with the Rules of Procedure; C) They register as members of a political party other than that for which they stood for election; d) They are judicially convicted of participating in organisations that possess a racist or fascist ideology.
2 – Illness, marriage, maternity or paternity, mourning, force majeure, parliamentary missions or work, and political work or work pertaining to the political party to which the Member of the assembly of the Republic in question belongs, as well as participation in parliamentary activities, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, shall be deemed justified reasons.
3 – Any Member of the Assembly of the Republic who is present at a sitting or meeting and invokes duly substantiated reasons of conscience shall be deemed justified in not taking part in voting.
4 – Transport difficulties may be deemed justification for failures to attend in exceptional cases.
5 – In the applicable cases set out in Article 20 and if the Member of the Assembly of the Republic
In question does not comply with the provisions of Article 21 (7), failure to suspend his term of office in accordance with Article 4 shall cause the loss of his seat in accordance with Article
160 (1) (a) of the Constitution.
The loss of seat shall be declared following verification by the
Assembly of the Republic, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure.
Article 9 substitution of Members of the Assembly of the Republic
1 – In cases in which a Member of the Assembly of the Republic's seat falls vacant or his term of office is suspended, he shall be substituted by the candidate who occupied the highest position
On the same electoral list and was not elected.
2 – In the event that the candidate who is called upon to take up the functions of Member of the Assembly of the Republic is temporarily unable to do so, the candidate who occupied the
Next ‐ highest position on the same electoral list shall take over his position.
3 – Once the inability has ended, the candidate shall once again take up his original position on the list for the purpose of future substitutions.
4 – If there are no longer any unelected effective or substitute candidates on the list of the Member of the Assembly of the Republic who is to be substituted, no substitution shall take place.
5 – Both the substitution provided for by this Article, and the recognition of the temporary
Inability on the part of an unelected candidate and of the end thereof, shall be subject to the
Issue of a request by the leadership of the Member of the Assembly of the Republic's parliamentary group, when one exists, or by the candidate with the right to fill the vacant seat.
5 Chapter II immunities
Article 10 non ‐ liability members of the Assembly of the Republic are not civilly or criminally liable for or subject to disciplinary sanctions in relation to their votes or the opinions they express in the exercise of
Their functions or because of them.
Article 11 inviolability
1 – No Member of the Assembly of the Republic may be detained, arrested or imprisoned
Without the Assembly's authorisation, save for a wilful crime which is punishable by imprisonment for a maximum term of more than three years and in flagrante delicto.
2 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic may not be heard as makers of declarations or
Official suspects without the Assembly's authorisation.
In the event of the existence of strong
Indications of the wilful commission of a crime that is punishable by imprisonment for a
Maximum term of more than three years, the Assembly shall obligatorily authorise that a Member be heard as an official suspect.
3 – In the event that criminal proceedings are brought against a Member of the Assembly of the
Republic and he is definitively charged, the Assembly shall decide, within the time limit laid down
In the Rules of Procedure, whether or not he must be suspended so that the proceedings can take their course, as follows: a) When the crime is of the type referred to in paragraph (1), suspension is obligatory;
B) The Assembly may limit the Member of the Assembly of the Republic's suspension to the time which, under the circumstances, it deems most appropriate to both the
Exercise of his mandate and the furtherance of the criminal proceedings.
4 – A charge shall become definitive, whereupon the procedural acts shall be pursued up until the trial hearing:
A) When, in the event of the intervention of an examining judge, the latter confirms the
Charge brought by the Public Prosecutors' Office and the decision is not challenged or,
In the event of an appeal, it is maintained by the higher court;
B) Once the decision to indict has transited in rem judicatam due to facts that differ from
Those set out in the charge brought by the Public Prosecutors' Office;
C) In the event that there are no committal proceedings, once the trial judge has issued the curative ruling;
D) In cases involving summary proceedings, once the Public Prosecutors' Office has
Requested the imposition of a sanction.
5 – The competent judge shall submit the authorisation request referred to in the previous paragraphs in the form of a document addressed to the President of the Assembly of the
Republic, and the request shall not lapse at the end of the legislature if the Member in question is elected for a new term of office.
6 – The decisions to which this Article refers shall be taken by the Plenary, which shall first hear the Member of the Assembly of the Republic involved and consider a formal written opinion
From the committee with competence for the matter in question.
6 7 – The time limit for the prescription of the criminal proceedings shall be suspended when the
Authorisation request made by the competent judge is submitted to the Assembly of the
Republic, in accordance with and for the purposes of Article 120 (1) (a) of the penal Code; if the
Assembly decides not to lift the Member's immunity, the suspension shall remain in effect for
As long as he is entitled to the prerogative.
Chapter III
Conditions under which mandates are exercised
Article 12 conditions under which the function of Member of the Assembly of the Republic is exercised
1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic shall exercise their mandate freely and shall be
Ensured the conditions appropriate to the effective exercise of their functions, particularly with regard to the indispensable contact with registered electors, and to being informed regularly.
2 – Each Member of the Assembly of the Republic has the right to appropriate working conditions, particularly:
A) his own individualised office at the seat of the Assembly of the Republic;
B) An individual assistant, to be recruited as laid down by law;
C) a dedicated electronic mailbox;
D) An individual page on the Assembly of the Republic's website.
3 – Every public entity is subject to the general duty of cooperation with Members of the assembly of the Republic, both in the exercise of their functions and because of them.
4 – Departments and services that belong to or are dependent on the central administration
Must furnish Members of the Assembly of the Republic with the conditions required for the exercise of their mandates, particularly by supplying such items, information and official
Publications as are requested and, whenever possible, by providing facilities for working meetings, on condition that this does not affect the operation of the department or service itself.
5 – When so asked by Members of the Assembly of the Republic, civil governments must provide
Appropriate facilities that enable the Members to have direct contact with the media and with the citizens from their constituencies.
6 – In the exercise of their functions Members of the Assembly of the Republic have the right to
Use postal services and telecommunications systems free of charge, as well as to the use of the
Parliamentary it network and other electronic information networks.
7 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic shall be ensured the use of toll ‐ free lines,
Automatic information systems and other forms of publicising their parliamentary activities and
Contacting electors, both at the central level and in their constituencies.
8 – The terms and conditions governing the use of each means of communication shall be set by the competent organs of the Assembly of the Republic.
7
Article 13 compensation for damages
1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic who, in the exercise of their functions or because
Of them, are victims of acts that imply an offence against their life, physical or moral integrity, freedom or assets have the right to fair compensation.
2 – The facts which justify that compensation shall be the object of an inquiry to be ordered by
The President of the Assembly of the Republic, who shall decide whether to award the compensation and the amount thereof, save if and to the extent that the damages are covered by other means.
Article 14 duties of Members of the Assembly of the Republic
1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic have the following duties:
A) To take part in parliamentary work, and particularly to attend Plenary sittings and
Meetings of the committees to which they belong;
B) To perform the offices in the Assembly and the functions that they are elected or appointed to at the proposal of the respective parliamentary groups;
C) To take part in voting;
D) To ensure the indispensable contact with registered electors;
E) To respect the dignity of the Assembly of the Republic and its Members;
F) To comply with the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly of the Republic.
2 – The exercise of any other activities, when legally permissible, may not prejudice the regular
Fulfilment of the duties provided for in the previous paragraph.
Article 15 rights of Members of the Assembly of the Republic
1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic's absences from official acts or procedures unrelated to the Assembly, due to Assembly sittings, meetings or missions, shall be sufficient
Reason to postpone the said acts or procedures without cost to the Members, but these grounds
May not be invoked more than once in relation to each act or procedure.
2 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic who attend any officially recognised course at any level of education shall be subject to the most favourable of all the different regimes with regard
To classes, examinations and the taking of other academic and scientific tests that are provided
For in relation to other situations.
3 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic also enjoy the following rights:
A) postponement of military service, civic service and civil mobilisation;
B) Free transit, which is deemed to mean free passage in public places to which access is restricted, upon display of the Member of the Assembly of the Republic's identity card;
C) a diplomatic passport per legislature, to be renewed in each legislative session;
D) a Member of the Assembly of the Republic's identity card, the model for and issue of
Which shall be determined by order of the President of the Assembly; 11 11 The model and issuance of the Member of the Assembly of the Republic's identity card were laid down in Order no.
94/XI of the President of the Assembly of the Republic, published in Series II ‐ e of the Journal 8
E) The remunerations and allowances laid down by law;
F) The rights provided for in the legislation governing the protection of maternity and
Paternity; g) The right to use and carry a firearm, in accordance with paragraph (7);
H) Priority in reservations for travel on public air transport companies during periods in
Which the Assembly is in full session, or for reasons related to the performance of their
Mandate.
4 – In addition to the Member of the Assembly of the Republic's name and signature and the
Signature of the President of the Assembly, the Member's identity card shall include the validity
Date determined by the Member's term of office, together with the number of his national identity card or citizen's card.
5 – The integrated circuit of the Member of the Assembly of the Republic's identity card shall
Include the software for electronic voting, together with the qualified certificate for electronic signature, and other elements that are indispensable to any new software that may be incorporated into it.
6 – When a Member of the Assembly of the Republic's term of office ends or is suspended, his
Diplomatic passport and Member's identity card must immediately be returned to the President of the Assembly.
7 – For the purposes of the rules governing the possession of, permits for, and the use and carriage of firearms and their munitions, Members of the Assembly of the Republic are subject
To the provisions of Article 5 of Law no.
5/2006 of 23 February 2006.
Article 16 allowances 1 – In the exercise of their functions and because of them, Members of the Assembly of the
Republic have the right to the following allowances:
A) Travel allowances during the Assembly of the Republic's parliamentary term;
B) Allowances in support of political work throughout the national territory, in
Accordance with Article 152 (2) of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic; C) Travel allowances for political work in constituencies.
2 – The allowance provided for in Article 16 (1) (a) shall include an allowance for travel expenses
And other expense allowances.
Its allocation shall be dependent on the submission of proof of execution.
3 – The allowance provided for in Article 16 (1) (b) shall be determined as an overall annual amount and processed on a monthly basis.
4 – The allowance provided for in Article 16 (1) (c) shall be allocated to those Members of the assembly of the Republic with funds subject to personal income tax.
Of the Assembly of the Republic, no.
5 of 7 December 2010.
However, the Assembly of the Republic's certifying Entity (ECAR) was extinguished.
It was replaced by the Assembly of the Republic's Registration entity (ERAR) and, therefore, this order is outdated.
9 5 – In the following situations arising from specific parliamentary activities, Members of the
Assembly of the Republic shall be entitled to allowances for travel and accommodation
Expenses, as well as other expense allowances, subject to authorisation and proof of execution: a) Travel for political work in the case of Members who are elected for the emigrant constituencies;
B) Travel for institutional representation of the Assembly of the Republic; C) Travel by delegations to international bodies of which the Assembly of the Republic is
A member, and to parliamentary missions abroad.
6 – The allowance scheme provided for in this Statute is implemented and complemented by a
Resolution of the Assembly of the Republic and corresponds, for all legal intents and purposes,
To a special scheme resulting from the constitutional nature of the parliamentary mandate.
7 – The resolution provided for in the foregoing paragraph also regulates the terms and
Conditions governing the use of official vehicles by Members of the Assembly of the Republic
Due to their position or parliamentary mission.
Article 16 ‐ a expense allowances
1 – The expense allowances provided for in Article 16 (2) shall be those laid down in the following
Paragraphs, without prejudice to other regulatory rules governing allowance discipline.
2 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic residing outside the municipalities of Lisbon,
Odivelas shall be entitled to expense allowances established for members of the Government,
Paid per each day of attendance of plenary sittings, committees or other meetings convened by the President of the Assembly of the Republic and two additional days per week.
3 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic who reside in the municipalities of Lisbon, Oeiras,
Cascais, Loures, Sintra, Vila franca de Xira, Almada, Seixal, Barreiro, Amadora and Odivelas shall be entitled to a third of the expense allowances established in the foregoing paragraph.
Article 16 ‐ b actual residence 1 – The actual residence of a Member of the Assembly of the Republic, which is relevant for
Determining allowances, shall be his/her place of habitual residence in accordance with the
Address recorded in the information contained in the citizen's card integrated circuit.
2 – The relevant residence for the purpose of determining allowances allocated to Members
Who are elected for the emigrant constituencies, if located outside the Portuguese territory shall
Be, during the whole mandate, the Member's stable residence on the date of the election, after
Certification by the relevant consular services.
For this purpose, determining a different domicile for personal income tax purposes is irrelevant.
3 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic who are elected for constituencies in Portuguese
Territory and who are residing abroad must choose a domicile within Portuguese territory for the purpose of allocating and processing allowances.
10
Article 16 ‐ C
Insurance and assistance 1 – When Members of the Assembly of the Republic are on official missions abroad they shall be entitled to life insurance in an amount to be set by the Board of Administration of the assembly.
2 – Subject to a favourable written opinion from the Board of Administration of the Assembly,
The Assembly of the Republic may take out an insurance policy that covers the travel risks that
Members run in Portugal or as may arise from missions abroad.
3 – When Members of the Assembly of the Republic are on official journeys or journeys which
The Conference of leaders deems to be of parliamentary interest, the Assembly shall bear the costs of any emergency medical assistance.
Article 17
Use of postal and communications services revoked.
Article 18
Social security regime 1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic shall enjoy the benefits of the general social security regime.
2 – In cases in which Members of the Assembly of the Republic opt for the social security regime applicable to their profession, the Assembly of the Republic shall bear the costs that would otherwise be borne by the employer.
Article 19
Guarantees with regard to work and social benefits
1 – In the exercise of their functions and because of them, Members of the Assembly of the Republic have the right to the following allowances:
A) Travel allowances during the Assembly of the Republic's parliamentary term;
B) Allowances in support of political work throughout the national territory, in
Accordance with Article 152 (2) of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic;
C) Travel allowances for political work in constituencies.
2 – The allowance provided for in Article 16 (1) (a) shall include an allowance for travel expenses
And other expense allowances.
Its allocation shall be dependent on the submission of proof of execution.
3 – The allowance provided for in Article 16 (1) (b) shall be determined as an overall annual amount and processed on a monthly basis.
4 – The allowance provided for in Article 16 (1) (c) shall be allocated to those Members of the assembly of the Republic with funds subject to personal income tax.
Of the Assembly of the Republic, no.
5 of 7 December 2010.
However, the Assembly of the Republic's certifying Entity (ECAR) was extinguished.
It was replaced by the Assembly of the Republic's Registration entity (ERAR) and, therefore, this order is outdated.
9
5 – In the following situations arising from specific parliamentary activities, Members of the
Assembly of the Republic shall be entitled to allowances for travel and accommodation
Expenses, as well as other expense allowances, subject to authorisation and proof of execution: a) Travel for political work in the case of Members who are elected for the emigrant constituencies;
B) Travel for institutional representation of the Assembly of the Republic;
C) Travel by delegations to international bodies of which the Assembly of the Republic is a member, and to parliamentary missions abroad.
6 – The allowance scheme provided for in this Statute is implemented and complemented by a
Resolution of the Assembly of the Republic and corresponds, for all legal intents and purposes,
7 – The resolution provided for in the foregoing paragraph also regulates the terms and conditions governing the use of official vehicles by Members of the Assembly of the Republic due to their position or parliamentary mission.
Article 16 ‐ a expense allowances
1 – The expense allowances provided for in Article 16 (2) shall be those laid down in the following
Paragraphs, without prejudice to other regulatory rules governing allowance discipline.
2 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic residing outside the municipalities of Lisbon,
Odivelas shall be entitled to expense allowances established for members of the Government,
Paid per each day of attendance of plenary sittings, committees or other meetings convened by the President of the Assembly of the Republic and two additional days per week.
3 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic who reside in the municipalities of Lisbon, Oeiras,
Cascais, Loures, Sintra, Vila franca de Xira, Almada, Seixal, Barreiro, Amadora and Odivelas shall be entitled to a third of the expense allowances established in the foregoing paragraph.
Article 16 ‐ b actual residence
1 – The actual residence of a Member of the Assembly of the Republic, which is relevant for
Determining allowances, shall be his/her place of habitual residence in accordance with the
Address recorded in the information contained in the citizen's card integrated circuit.
2 – The relevant residence for the purpose of determining allowances allocated to Members
Who are elected for the emigrant constituencies, if located outside the Portuguese territory shall be, during the whole mandate, the Member's stable residence on the date of the election, after certification by the relevant consular services.
For this purpose, determining a different domicile
For personal income tax purposes is irrelevant.
3 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic who are elected for constituencies in Portuguese
Territory and who are residing abroad must choose a domicile within Portuguese territory for the purpose of allocating and processing allowances.
10 Article 16 ‐ C insurance and assistance
1 – When Members of the Assembly of the Republic are on official missions abroad they shall be entitled to life insurance in an amount to be set by the Board of Administration of the assembly.
2 – Subject to a favourable written opinion from the Board of Administration of the Assembly,
The Assembly of the Republic may take out an insurance policy that covers the travel risks that
Members run in Portugal or as may arise from missions abroad.
3 – When Members of the Assembly of the Republic are on official journeys or journeys which
The Conference of leaders deems to be of parliamentary interest, the Assembly shall bear the costs of any emergency medical assistance.
Article 17 use of postal and communications services revoked.
Article 18
Social security regime
1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic shall enjoy the benefits of the general social security regime.
2 – In cases in which Members of the Assembly of the Republic opt for the social security regime
Applicable to their profession, the Assembly of the Republic shall bear the costs that would otherwise be borne by the employer.
Article 19
Guarantees with regard to work and social benefits
1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic may not be prejudiced in their professional
Assignments, social benefits or permanent employment due to the fulfilment of their mandate.
2 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic have the right to be dispensed from all
Professional, public and private activities during the legislature.
3 – Fulfilment of the mandate shall count towards length of service for all purposes, save those
That presuppose the actual exercise of a profession, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 5 (4).
4 – In the case of a function that is temporary by law or by contract, fulfilment of a Member of the Assembly of the Republic's mandate shall suspend the counting of the respective time period.
Article 20 incompatibilities
1 – The following positions and functions are incompatible with the exercise of the mandate of Member of the Assembly of the Republic: a) President of the Republic, member of the Government, and Representative of the
Republic to an Autonomous Region;
11 b) Member of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court of Justice, the Supreme
Administrative Court, the Court of Audit, the Supreme Judicial Council, the Supreme
Council of the Administrative and Fiscal Courts, attorney General, and Ombudsman;
C) Member of the European Parliament;
D) Member of the self ‐ government organs of Autonomous Regions;
E) Ambassador, unless the Member of the Assembly of the Republic is a career Diplomat;
F) Civil Governor and Deputy Civil Governor;
G) Mayor, deputy Mayor, legal substitute for the Mayor, and municipal Councillor, either
Full ‐ or part ‐ time;
H) Employee of the state or another public legal person;
I) Member of the National Electoral Commission;
J) Member of a ministerial office or legally equivalent position;
L) Holder of a senior international office or function, if it prevents exercise of the parliamentary mandate, and employee of an international organisation or foreign state;
M) President and vice ‐ President of the Economic and Social Council;
N) Member of the Media Regulatory Body;
O) Member of the board of directors of a public ‐ sector company, of a company with public capital or in which the state holds a majority stake, or of an autonomous public Institute.
2 – The provisions of subparagraph (h) of the previous paragraph do not encompass the exercise
Without charge of higher education teaching functions, research work and other similar activities
That are of important social interest and are recognised as such on a case ‐ by ‐ case basis by the Ethics Committee of the Assembly of the Republic.
3 – Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 4 (1) (a) and (2) and following implementation
Of the provisions of Article 21 (7), the exercise of an incompatible position or function shall imply the loss of the Member of the Assembly of the Republic's seat.
Article 21 disqualifications
1 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic require the Assembly's authorisation in order to be jurors, expert witnesses or witnesses.
2 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic require the Assembly's authorisation in order to serve as arbiters in proceedings in which the state or any other public ‐ law legal person is a party.
3 – The authorisation referred to in paragraph (1) must be requested by the competent judge or
By the official responsible for the committal proceedings, in the form of a document addressed to the President of the Assembly of the Republic, and the Member in question shall be heard prior to the decision as to whether to grant the authorisation.
4 – Members of the Assembly of the Republic may exercise other activities, on condition that
They are not excluded by the provisions of the following paragraphs, and they must notify the constitutional Court of the nature and details thereof.
5 – Without prejudice to the provisions of the regimes governing incompatibilities and
Disqualifications set out in special laws, particularly with regard to the exercise of positions or
Professional activities, the following situations shall also preclude the exercise of the mandate of Member of the Assembly of the Republic: 12
A) Holding a position as member of a corporate organ of a public legal person, or of a
Company whose capital is wholly or majority held by the public sector, or of a company that holds a public service concession, with the exception of a consultative, scientific or
Pedagogical organ or one that forms part of the autonomous institutional
Administration;
B) Serving as a paid expert or arbiter in any proceedings in which the state or other
Public ‐ law legal persons are a party;
C) Holding a government appointment, acceptance of which has not been authorised by
The parliamentary committee with competence for the matter in question.
6 – Without prejudice to the provisions of special laws, Members of the Assembly of the Republic are also precluded from accumulating the following activities with that of Member:
A) In the case of the direct or indirect exercise of commercial or industrial activities, with a spouse from whom the Member of the Assembly of the Republic is not judicially
Separated from bed and board, or for or on his own behalf or that of an entity in which

